>> Brown: A NEW WAVE OF VIOLENCE
STOKES ESCALATED TENSIONS IN THE
MIDDLE EAST, AS HAMAS LAUNCHES
ROCKET ATTACKS AND ISRAEL WAGES
AIR STRIKES.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
GWEN IFILL IS AWAY.
ALSO AHEAD THIS MONDAY, PROTESTS
IN CALIFORNIA AND WASHINGTON,
D.C., DEMONSTRATE THE DIVIDE
OVER WHAT TO DO WITH A SURGE IN
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANT CHILDREN
ENTERING THE U.S.
PLUS, WHO'S REALLY BENEFITING
FROM THE G.I. BILL?
FOR-PROFIT COLLEGES OR THE VETS
LOOKING FOR A QUALITY EDUCATION?
>> WE'RE NOT GETTING THE
INVESTMENT THAT WE WANTED WHEN
WE SENT THESE MEN AND WOMEN TO.
>> THE VETERANS HAVE CHOSEN US
BECAUSE OF THE PROGRAMS THAT WE
OFFER.
THOSE PROGRAMS LEAD TO CAREERS
THAT THEY WANT TO ASPIRE TO.
>> Brown: THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: REBELS IN UKRAINE
TRIED TO REGROUP TODAY AFTER
MAJOR SETBACKS OVER THE WEEKEND.
THE PRO-RUSSIAN FIGHTERS LOST
THEIR FORMER STRONGHOLD IN
SLOVAYANSK, AND FELL BACK TO
DONETSK, VOWING TO KEEP FIGHTING
GOVERNMENT FORCES.
ALONG THE WAY, THREE BRIDGES
LEADING INTO DONETSK WERE BLOWN
UP TODAY.
ONE WAS A RAILWAY BRIDGE THAT
WAS BOMBED AS A CARGO TRAIN
PASSED OVER.
AMID THE FIGHTING, RUSSIA
PRESSED AGAIN TODAY FOR A NEW
CEASE-FIRE IN UKRAINE.
THE POLITICAL STALEMATE IN IRAQ
WILL GO ON, AS THE GOVERNMENT
BATTLES ISLAMIST MILITANTS
WHO'VE SEIZED A LARGE PORTION OF
THE COUNTRY.
THE NEW PARLIAMENT TODAY DELAYED
ITS NEXT SESSION FOR FIVE WEEKS,
UNTIL MID-AUGUST.
LEADERS ARE AT AN IMPASSE OVER
CHOOSING A PRIME MINISTER,
PRESIDENT AND SPEAKER OF
PARLIAMENT.
SHIITE PRIME MINISTER NOURI AL-
MALIKI HAS REFUSED TO STEP
ASIDE.
THE WHITE HOUSE ISN'T CONFIRMING
THAT A GERMAN INTELLIGENCE
WORKER SPIED FOR THE U.S.
A SPOKESMAN SAID TODAY HE CAN'T
COMMENT ON THE MATTER.
A 31-YEAR-OLD GERMAN MAN WAS
ARRESTED LAST WEEK, AND THERE
HAVE BEEN REPORTS HE ADMITTED TO
PASSING DOCUMENTS TO A U.S.
CONTACT.
GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL
ADDRESSED THE MATTER TODAY,
DURING A VISIT TO CHINA.
>> ( translated ): WE HAVE
ALREADY OPENED AN INVESTIGATION.
IF THE REPORTS ARE CORRECT IT
WOULD BE A SERIOUS CASE.
IF THE ALLEGATIONS ARE TRUE, IT
WOULD BE FOR ME A CLEAR
CONTRADICTION TO WHAT I CONSIDER
TO BE A TRUSTFUL COOPERATION
BETWEEN AGENCIES AND PARTNERS.
>> Woodruff: U.S.-GERMAN
RELATIONS HAVE BEEN STRAINED
SINCE LAST YEAR, AFTER
REVELATIONS OF LARGE-SCALE
SNOOPING BY THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY ON GERMANY.
POPE FRANCIS MEWIT  VTITHMSICOF
SEXUAL ABUSE BY PRIESTS, FOR THD
APOLOGIZED.
THE PONTIFF CELEBRATED MASS AT
HIS VATICAN HOTEL, WITH SIX
VICTIMS WHO RECOUNTED THEIR
PERSONAL STORIES OF ABUSE.
>> ( translated ): BEFORE GOD
AND HIS PEOPLE I EXPRESS MY
SORROW FOR THE SINS AND GRAVE
CRIMES OF CLERICAL SEXUAL ABUSE
COMMITTED AGAINST YOU.
AND I HUMBLY ASK FORGIVENESS.
I BEG YOUR FORGIVENESS, TOO, FOR
THE SINS OF OMISSION ON THE PART
OF CHURCH LEADERS WHO DID NOT
RESPOND ADEQUATELY TO REPORTS OF
ABUSE MADE BY FAMILY MEMBERS, AS
WELL AS BY ABUSE VICTIMS
THEMSELVES.
>> Woodruff: THE POPE ALSO VOWED
TO HOLD BISHOPS ACCOUNTABLE FOR
THE PROTECTION OF MINORS, BUT HE
DID NOT GIVE DETAILS ON HOW HE
WOULD DO THAT.
IN KENYA, ANTI-GOVERNMENT
PROTESTS IN NAIROBI TURNED
VIOLENT TODAY.
POLICE AND DEMONSTRATORS BATTLED
WITH TEAR GAS AND STONES AS A
RALLY IN A NEARBY PARK SPILLED
OVER INTO THE STREETS.
THE CROWDS HAD GATHERED TO
DEMAND TALKS WITH THE GOVERNMENT
OVER ECONOMIC INEQUALITY AND
OTHER GRIEVANCES.
AND IN NIGERIA, OFFICIALS IN THE
NORTHEAST REPORT 63 GIRLS WHO
WERE KIDNAPPED LAST MONTH HAVE
ESCAPED.
THEY APPARENTLY GOT AWAY AS
THEIR CAPTORS IN THE BOKO HARAM
MILITANT GROUP WERE BATTLING
NIGERI SOLDIERS.
MEANWHILE, A GOVERNMENT
SPOKESMAN REPORTS PROGRESS IN
THE INVESTIGATION OF APRIL'S
ABDUCTION OF 200 OTHER SCHOOL
GIRLS.
>> WE ARE MOVING CLOSER TO
FINDING THEM.
AT LEAST WE HAVE IDENTIFIED A
NUMBER OF LEADS, WE HAVE
IDENTIFIED IN THE COURSE OF THIS
EXERCISE AND THAT WAS WHAT EVEN
LED TO THE ARREST OF THE CHIEF
OF INTELLIGENCE OF BOKO HARAM.
>> Woodruff: NIGERIA'S
GOVERNMENT AND MILITARY HAVE
FACED INTERNATIONAL CRITICISM
FOR FAILING TO RESCUE THE KIDNAP
VICTIMS.
ONE OF THE LAST FOREIGN
MINISTERS OF THE SOVIET UNION,
EDUARD SHEVARDNADZE, DIED TODAY.
IN THE LATE 1980'S, UNDER SOVIET
PRESIDENT MIKHAIL GORBACHEV, HE
SIGNED MAJOR ARMS CONTROL DEALS
AND HELPED EASTERN EUROPE REGAIN
ITS FREEDOM.
AFTER THE SOVIET COLLAPSE, HE
BECAME PRESIDENT OF GEORGIA, AND
SURVIVED TWO ASSASSINATION
ATTEMPTS.
HE EVENTUALLY RESIGNED.
EDUARD SHEVARDNADZE WAS 86 YEARS
OLD.
A FEDERAL JUDGE IN PHILADELPHIA
GIVEN INITIAL APPROVAL TO
LANDMARK CONCUSSION SETTLEMENT
BETWEEN THE NATIONAL FOOTBALL
LEAGUE AND FMEROR PLAYERS,
COMING TODAY AFTER THE LEAGUE WE
MOVED A CAP OF $675 MILLION ON
CLAIMS FOR MEDICAL DAMAGES.
THE JUDGE QUESTIONED WHETHER
THAT AMOUNT WOULD BE ENOUGH TO
PAY ALL CLAIMS.
THE ASSESSMENT INVOLVES MORE
THAN 3500 FORMER PLAYERS WHO
HAVE SUED THE NFL.
WALL STREET CAME BACK FROM THE
HOLIDAY WEEKEND IN CAUTIOUS
MOOD.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 44 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
17,024.
THE NASDAQ FELL 34 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 4,451.
AND THE S-AND-P 500 DROPPED 7,
TO FINISH AT 1,977.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
RENEWED VIOLENCE STOKES TENSIONS
IN THE MID-EAST;
DISPUTED ELECTION RESULTS IN
AFGHANISTAN'S PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION;
ACCESSING WHO'S REALLY
BENEFITING FROM THE G.I. BILL;
AND PROTESTS SHOWCASE THE DEBATE
OVER UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANT
CHILDREN COMING TO THE U.S.
>> Woodruff: NOW TO THE MIDDLE
EAST, WHERE THERE HAS BEEN A
MAJOR ESCALATION OF TENSIONS IN
THE LAST FEW HOURS.
IT FOLLOWS DAYS OF UP ST
SPARKED BY THE DEATHS OF THREE
ISRAELI TEENS AND A PALESTINIAN
TEENAGER.
THREE ISRAELI SUSPECTS IN THE
KILLING OF THE PALESTINIAN TEEN
CONFESSED TO THE CRIME TODAY.
PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU FOUND THE TEEN'S
FATHER AND VOWED THE KILLERS
WOULD BE BROUGHT TO JUSTICE.
TONIGHT HAMAS FIRED DOZENS OF
ROCKETS INTO ISRAEL, CLAIMING
REVENGE FOR ISRAELI AIR STRIKES
OVERNIGHT WHICH THEY SAY KILLED
SIX OF ITS MEMBERS.
A SHORT TIME AGO, I SPOKE TO
JOSEF FEDERMAN WHO HAS BEEN
COVERING A STORY FOR THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS.
JOSEF, THANK YOU FOR TALKING
WITH US.
BRING US UP TO DATE ON WHAT IS
GOING ON.
WHAT IS EACH SIDE DOING?
>> WELL, IT'S BEEN A PRETTY BUSY
DAY HERE.
THINGS ARE HEATING UP IN
SOUTHERN ISRAEL ALONG THE GAZA
BORDER.
GAZA MILITANTS HAVE FIRED ABOUT
100 ROCKETS TODAY INTO ISRAEL OR
AT ISRAEL.
ISRAEL HAS RESPONDED WITH
LIMITED AIR STRIKES EARLIER IN
THE DAY.
THE ROCKET FIRE HEATED UP,
REALLY INTENSIFIED THIS EVENING.
THERE WAS A BARRAGE OF NEARLY 50
ROCKETS AFTER NIGHTFALL, SOME OF
THEM SET OFF ALARMS DEEP INSIDE
ISRAEL, ABOUT 50 MILES AWAY FROM
THE BORDER, REACHING ALMOST THE
OUTSKIRTS OF TEL AVIV.
SO THIS IS SEEN AS A BIT OF AN
ESCALATION.
ISRAEL HASN'T RESPONDED TO THE
LATEST BARRAGE BUT WE'RE
EXPECTING A PTTYRE LONG NIGHT.
>> Woodruff: HOW IS THIS
DIFFERENT FROM WHAT NORMALLY HAS
BEEN TAKING PLACE THERE?
>> WELL, MOST OF THE TIME THE
ROCKET FIRE IS PRETTY LIMITED TO
WHEN THERE ARE ATTACKS AND THERE
ARE PERIODS WHEN IT'S QUIET ALL
TOGETHER BUT USUALLY IT'S
LIMITED TO ONE OR TWO OR A
HANDFUL OF ROCKETS FIRED AT
SHORT DISTANCES INTO OPEN AREAS.
NOW WE ARE SEEING AN INTENSITY
THAT WE HAVEN'T SEEN FOR SEVERAL
YEARS WHERE IT DOZENS
DOZENS EACH DAY, THE DISTANCE
THAT THEY'RE FLYING IS A LOT
FURTHER AND MANY ARE REACHING
POPULATED AREAS.
>> Woodruff: TELL US MORE
ABOUT ISRAEL'S RESPONSE.
WE KNOW YOU MENTIONED THE AIR
STRIKES.
THEY'RE CALLING UP RERVISSETS AS
WELL, RIGHT?
>> YEAH, WHAT WE'VE SEEN IS
ISRAEL IS MOVING FORCES DOWN
TOWARD THE BORDER.
WE HAVE HAD AP PEOPLE ALONG THE
BORDER TODAY.
WE SAW PICTURES OF ROWS AND ROWS
OF TANKS AND BUSES FILLED WITH
SOLDIERS, PEOPLE KIND OF MILLING
AROUND THE BORDER AREA, EVEN
THIS EVENING THE ROADS IS ARE
EMPTY DOWN THERE BECAUSE MOST
PEOPLE ARE STAYING INSIDE BOMB
SHELTERS WITH ALL THE ROCKETS
FLYING.
THE ONLY TRAFFIC YOU SEE ON THE
ROADS BASICALLY ARE MILITARY
VEHICLES BRINGING TANKS, ARMORED
VEHICLES AND SO FORTH, SO ISRAEL
SEEMS TO BE BRACING.
WILL BEGIN BY THE SPECULATIONIS
LIMITING ACTIVITY TO AERIAL
BOMBARDMENTS.
I DON'T THINK THEY WILL SEND IN
GROUND TROOPST LEAST AT THIS
STAGE, BUT WHAT WE'RE EXPECTING
IS A MUCH MORE INTENSE, A
HEAVIER RESPONSE TO WHAT YOU
HAVE BEEN SEEING EARLIER.
FOR THE MOST PART, ISRAEL HAS
BEEN GOING AFTER MILITARY HAMAS
TRAINING BASES AND FIELDS AND
LAUNCHING SITES.
WHAT YOU MAY SEE ARE SORT OF
HIGHER VALUE TARGETS, PLACES
WHERE MAYBE THERE ARE FORCES,
YOU MAY SEE MORE CASUALTIES AND
SO FORTH, SO THAT'S THE TYPE OF
THING I'M EXPECTING TO SEE IN
THE NEXT FEW HOURS.
>> Woodruff: WE ALSO KNOW
MAHMOUD ABBAS HAS BEEN SPEAKING
OUT, THE PALESTINIAN PRESIDENT.
WHAT IS HE TRYING TO DO?
>> HE'S ACTUALLY BEEN PRETTY
QUIET ON THE SITUATION IN GAZA.
HE ALWAYS SPEAKS OUT AGAINST
VIOLCE.EN
ANYTIME THERE'S LOSS OF
PALESTINIAN LIFE.AND THERE WEREN
MILITANTS KILLED TODAY.
HE ALWAYS CONDEMNS THAT.
HIS FOCUS HAS BEEN ON THE
SITUATION IN JERUSALEM AND THE
WEST BANK.
THINGS ARE HEATING UP IN ISRAEL
FOLLOWING THE DEATH OF A
PALESTINIAN TEENAGER LAST WEEK.
ISRAEL HAS ARRESTED SOME JEWISH
ISRAELIS ASPECTS, AND THE
PALLS -- AS SUSPECTS AND THE
PALESTINIANS ARE UPSET AND
THAT'S WHERE PRESIDENT ABBAS HAS
BEEN FOCUSING HIS ATTENTION.
>> Woodruff: AND WHAT IS THE
REACTION IN ISRAEL?
WE REPORTED SOME OF THE ISRAELI
SUSPECTS WHO WERE ARRESTED NOW
CONFESSED TO THE KILLING OF THE
PALESTINIAN TEENAGER.
HOW IS THAT BEING RECEIVED?
>> YEAH, THE ARRESTS -- AND WE
DILL STILL DON'T HAVE THE IDENT.
A LOT OF THE INFORMATION IS KEPT
UNDER WRAPS AS THE INVESTIGATION
WHAT WE DO KNOW IS THE SUSPECTS
ARE JEWER.
AUTHORITIES SAY THREE PEOPLE
CONFESSED TODAY AND IT SET OFF
SOUL SEARCHING IN ISRAEL.
THERE'S A LOT OF SHOCK BECAUSE
TO HAVE THE BRUTALITY AND HOW
GRIZZLY THIS KILLING WAS WHERE
THEY BURNED SOMEBODY ALIVE.
SO PEOPLE ARE HAVING A HARD TIME
COMING TO TERMS WITH THIS, AND
EVEN THE NATION'S TOP LEADERS,
THE PRESIDENT, A NOBEL PEACE
PRIZE WINNER, CALLED THE FAMILY,
THE BOY'S PARENTS TODAY TO
EXPRESS HIS CONDOLENCES AND TOLD
THEM HOW SHOCKED AND ASHAMED HE
WAS.
YOU AR THAT A LOT, "SHAME,"
YOU HEAR IT IN NEWSPAPERS, AMONG
POLITICIANS, EVEN PRIME
MINISTER BENJAMIN NETANYAHU
REACHED OUT AND CALLED THE
FAMILIES AND YOU DON'T NORMALLY
SI ISRAELIS REACHING ACROSS THE
AISLES TO PALESTINIANS.
>> Woodruff: TO SUM UP, YOU
SAID, ISRAEL, BOTH SIDES ARE
BRACING FOR SOMETHING WORSE?
>> I THINK SO.
HAMAS, THIS MORNING, AFTER IT
SUFFERED CASUALTIES, LIKE I
SAID, EIGHT MILITANTS WERE
KILLED OVERNIGHT LAST NIGHT AND
THAT WAS THE H HEAVIEST DEATH
TOLL WE'VE SEEN SO FAR.
THEY IMMEDIATELY VOWED REVENGE.
THEN WE SEE 100 ROCKETS FLYING
THROUGHOUT THE COURSE OF THE
DAY.
SO I THINK THE MILITANT GROUPS
IN GAZA ARE EXPECTING SOMETHING,
AND ISRAEL ALMOST ALWAYS
RESPONDS, AND ESPECIALLY AFTER A
BARRAGE OF THIS INTENSITY, IT'S
IMPOSSIBLE FOR ISRAEL TO SIT
BACK AND NOT DO ANYTHING.
THERE IS JUST SO MUCH PUBLIC
PRESSURE TO DO SOMETHING.
SO IT REALLY ALMOST SEEMS
INEVITABLE THAT YOU'RE GOING TO
SEE MORE FIGHTING IN THE COMING
HOURS.
>> Woodruff: JOSEF FEDERMAN,
ASSOCIATED PRESS, WE THANK YOU.
>> THANK
>> Woodruff: AND JOINING ME NOW
TO HELP US UNDERSTAND THE LATEST
DEVELNT A
LONGTIME U.S. DIPLOMAT AND MID-
EAST ENVOY SERVING IN THE GEORGE
H.W. BUSH, CLINTON D OBANMA
ADMINISTRATIONS.
HE'S NOW A COUNSELOR AT THE
WASHINGTON INSTITUTE FOR NEAR-
EAST POLICY.
AND SHIBLEY TELHAMI, THE ANWAR
SADAT PROFESSOR OF PEACE AND
DEVELOPMENT AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
MARYLAND, SENIOR FELLOW AT THE
BROOKINGS INSTITUTION AND AUTHOR
OF THE BOOK, "THE WORLD THROUGH
ARAB EYES."
WE THANK YOU BOTH.
WOMEN COME BACK TO THE
"NewsHour".
WHAT DO YOU THINK HAS SET OFF
THE LATEST ROUND OF VIOLENCE?
>> I THINK IT WAS CONNECTED TO
THE KIDNAPPINGS OF THE THREE
ISRAELI TEENAGERS.
ISRAEL HAS HELD HAMAS
RESPONSIBLE FOR THAT AND YOU
BEGAN TO SEE THE BEGINNINGS OF
THIS PROCESS OF TIT FOR TAT
AFTER THAT.
NOW YOU HAVE THE REVENGE
KILLING, WHICH IF WE HEARD FROM
THE REPORT, HAS CREATED A SHOCK
WAVE IN ISRAEL, BUT TAKES PLACE
AGAINST THE BACKDROP OF
INCREASING TENSION BETWEEN HAMAS
AND GAZA.
THEY DON'T WANT TO LOOK LIKE
THEY'RE BACKING DOWN.
HAMAS VOWS REVENGE BECAUSE, YOU
KNOW, EIGHT OF THEIR OPERATIVES
WERE KILLED LAST NIGHT, AND THEY
SENSE THAT THERE'S AN URGEY ON
THE PART OF ISRAELIS TO COME IN
ON THE GROUND AND IT'S ALMOST AS
IF THEY'RE TESTING THE ISRAELS
TO SEE HOW FAR THEY GO BUT THEY
DON'T WANT TO GO TOO FAR BECAUSE
IF THEY REALLY PROVOKE THE
ISRAELIS TO COME IN ON THE
GROUND THEY KNOT DON'T KNOW HOW
FAR THEY WILL GO AND THE PRICE
TO HAMAS COULD BE GREAT.
>> Woodruff: SHIBLEY TELHAMI,
HOW DO YOU READ WHAT IS GOING ON
AND HOW THE PALESTINIAN
LEADERSHIP IS READING IT?
>> I HAPPENED TO BE IN JERUSALEM
AND RAMALLAH WHEN THE ISRAELIS
WERE KIDNAPPED AND MY FEEL,
PARTICULARLY IN RAMALLAH RIGHTS
TE LIKE
1987 AGAIN, 1987 WAS THE START
OF THE FIRST.
AND THERE WERE SOME THINGS THAT
WERE SO SIMILAR.
PALESTINIAN DESPAIR OVER THE
DISTRACTION EMBROILED BY OTHER
PROBLEMS.
WHAT'S HAPPENING IN IRAQ, EGYPT,
SYRIA.
IN THE 1985s, PALESTINIAN WERE
FRUSTRATED THAT ATTENTION WAS
GOING TO IRAQ IN THE IRAQ-IRAN
WAR AND PEOPLE WEREN'T PAYING
ATTENTION TO THEIR ISSUES.
THERE WAS FRUSTRATION FROM THE
LEADERSHIP DETACHED AND THERE
WAS A SENSE THE PEOPLE HAD TO DO
SOMETHING ON THEIR OWN.
THERE IS THAT SENSE OF
ALIENATION.
IN FACT BOTH MAHMOUD ABBAS AND
HAMAS RISK BEING IRRELEVANT,
WHICH IS WHY THEY CAME TOGETHER,
TO BE MORE RELEVANT.
SO YOU HAVE THE COMBINATION THAT
IS COMBUSTIBLE.
ON TOP OF THAT, THE FELLOW OF
AMERICAN DIPLOMACY AND A SENSE
OF RESIGNATION, IT WAS A
DISASTER WAITING FOR A SPARK.
>> Woodruff: I GATHER FROM
BOTH OF YOUR ANSWERS IT'S NOT
CLEARED WHAT THE LEADERSHIP ON
EACH SIDE, HOW FAR THEY'RE
PREPARED TO TAKE IT.
>> I THINK THAT'S RIGHT.
WE HAVE TWO DIFFERENT REALITIES
TAKING PLACE.
WE HAVE THE REALITY IN JERUSALEM
WHICH MAY OR MAY NOT BE, AND IN
GAZA WHICH CONFRONTS HAMAS AND
THE YIRLZ LEADERSHIP WITH HARD
CHOICES.
THAT POINT, WHERE IS THE
LEADERSHIP?
IN THE CASE OF ISRAELI PRIME
MINISTER BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, YOU
CAN SEE THAT ON THE ONE HAND HE
WANTS TO MAKE IT CLEAR THAT
HAMAS, THERE'S A TERRIBLE PRICE
TO BE PAID AS THEY CONTINUE TO
PROVOKE ISRAEL.
ON THE OTHER HAND, HE HIMSELF IS
SAYING THIS IS NOT A TIME FOR
HISTIE, EMOTIONAL DECISIONS BUT
A TIME FOR JUDICIOUS BEHAVIOR.
ALSO THE FACT HE REACHES OUT TO
THE PARENTS TO HAVE THE
PALESTINIAN TEEN WHO WAS KILLED
IS A SIGNAL THAT SAYS, LOOK, WE
ARE GOING TO ACT AGAINST OUR
EXCESSES.
WHAT HAPPENED WAS SHAMEFUL AND
WE'RE A COUNTRY RULED BY LAW AND
WE'RE GOING TO ACT AND THAT'S
ALSO BOTH A REFLECTION OF I
THINK A DEEP-SEATEDFEELING BUT
ALSO SENDS A SIGNAL THAT THE
LAST THING WE WANT TO SEE IS AN
EXPLOSION WITH THE PALESTINIANS.
>> Woodruff: PICK UP ON THAT,
AND TALK ABOUT THE FORCES ON
EACH SIDE.
>> THE POLITICAL LEADERSHIP IN
HAMAS AND THE PRIME MINISTER OF
ISRAEL DON'T WANT AN ESCALATION
AT THIS TIME.
IT'S TOO A COSTLY, DISRUPTS
THEIR PRIORITIES, ARE NOT READY
FOR IT BUT MAY BE DRAGGED IN
THAT DIRECTION.
WHY?
LOOK AT THE DIVISIONS FIRST OF
ALL WITHIN ISRAEL.
IT'S NOT JUST PUBLIC OPINION.
PUBLIC OPINION IS ONE SET OF
PROBLEMS.
WHEN THE PRIME MINISTER OF
ISRAEL STARTS SOUNDING LIKE HE'S
THE MODERATE IN HIS OWN
GOVERNMENT, YOU CAN TELL THAT
YOU'VE GOT A PROBLEM ON YOUR
HAND.
IN HAMAS, THEY HAVE TWO
PROBLEMS, ONE PROBLEM IS THEY,
JUST LIKE ISRAELIS, THEY LEARN
FROM HESBOLLAH, THAT WHEN THEY
FEEL UNDER ATTACK OR LOSE,HEY
HAVE TO RETALIATE, LIKE ISRAELIS
FEEL THAT PRESSURE.
THERE IS THAT DYNAMIC.
THERE ARE GROUPS WITHIN GAZA
THAT WE CAN'T FULLY CONTROL.
THEY HAVE BEEN FIRING SOME OF
THE ROCKETS ACROSS THE ISRAELI
BORDERS AND WE DON'T KNOW HOW
DIVIDED THEY ARE.
THE DEAL TO HAVE A NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT AND PROCEED WITH A
POLITICAL PROCESS WAS SOMEWHAT
CONTROVERSIAL WITHIN HAMAS, SO
WE DON'T KNOW WHAT FORCES ARE AT
PLAY WHEN YOU HAVE A POLITICAL
ENVIRONMENT IN PUBLIC THAT IS
MOBILIZED AND ANGRY, PEOPLE ARE
GOING TO MAY TO THE PUBLIC.
>> HOW MUCH IS THE PUBLIC ON
BOTH SIDES, DENS DENNIS, PUSHINP
THIS TO MORE CRISIS POINT THAN
IT ALREADY IS.
>> I DON'T THINK EITHER SIDE IS
PUSHING IT TO CRISIS POINT.
I THINK THERE'S A LEVEL OF
DESPAIR ON THE PALESTINIAN SIDE
AND ANGER ON THE ISRAELI SIDE,
BUT I THINK YOU HAVE, IN A
SENSE, CERTAIN CONSTITUENCIES
THAT MAY BE PUSHING.
SHIBLEY MADE REFERENCE TO THE
PRESSURES UNDER PRIME MINISTER
NETANYAHU.
WE SEE IT IN TERMS OF FORMER
MINISTER LIEBERMAN NOT LEAVING
THE GOVERNMENT BUT SPLITTING
FROM THE COALITION WITH THE
PARTY.
WE SEE IT IN TERMS ATOUT WHAT I
CALL THE MILITARY WING OF HAMAS.
THEY'RE THE ONES WHO LAUNCHED
THE ROCKETS TODAY.
UP TILL NOW, THEY HAVE NOT BEEN
THE ONES LAUNCHING THE ROCKETS.
BUT YOU CAN SEE SEGMENTS ON EACH
SIDE WHO SEE AN EMOTIONAL MOMENT
AND ARE REACTING TO THAT.
THE QUESTION IS, IS THERE
SUFFICIENT CONTROL OF LEADERS TO
BE ABLE TO  THAT?
I THINK ON THE ISRAELI SIDE,
THERE IS.
ON THE PALESTINIAN SIDE, IT'S
MUCH MORE AN OPEN QUESTION.
>> Woodruff: HOW WOULD YOU
ANSWER THAT?
>> ON BOTH SIDES, IT'S AN OPEN
QUESTION.
IN PART BECAUSE THE ISRAELI
GOVERNMENT HAS A LOT OF PEOPLE
ON THE RIGHT WHO WANT TO TAKE --
WHO ARE RUNNING FOR THE NEXT
PRIME MINISTER POSITION IN THE
ISRAELI ELECTION AND THEY'RE
EXPLOITING THIS JUST LIKE THEY
ARE PEOPLE ON THE PALESTINIAN
SIDE WHO WANT TO GO TO A
MILITANCY.
I THINK NEITHER SIDE WANTS FROM
FRUSTRATION BUT THEY COULD GO
THERE.
WE SAW SEVEN HORRIBLE KILLS THAT
DRAGGED PEOPLE INTO A
SITUATIONAL CONFRONTATION.
>> Woodruff: A LOT OF
QUESTIONS COMING OUT OF THIS.
WE THANK YOU BOTH FOR TALKING TO
US TONIGHT, SHIBLEY TELHAMI,
DENNIS ROSS.
T THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: IN AFGHANISTAN,
ELECTION OFFICIALS TODAY
ANNOUNCED INTERIM RESULTS IN THE
RECENT PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS,
BUT THEY ALSO SAID NO WINNER CAN
BE DECLARED YET BECAUSE MILLIONS
OF BALLOTS WERE BEING AUDITED
FOR FRAUD.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY.
>> Brown: THE PRELIMINARY
RESULTS CAME NEARLY A MONTH
AFTER AFGHAN VOTERS WENT TO THE
POLLS IN THE PRESIDENTIAL RUN-
OFF.
THE NATIONAL ELECTION COMMISSION
ANNOUNCED FORMER FINANCE
MINISTER ASHRAF GHANI WON 56% OF
THE VOTE.
FORMER FOREIGN MINISTER ABDULLAH
ABDULLAH TRAILED WITH 43%, A
REVERSAL OF THE DOUBLE-DIGIT
LEAD HE'D HELD AFTER THE FIRST
ROUND.
>> ( translated ): I WANT TO
EMPHASIZE THAT THE PRELIMINARY
RESULT ANNOUNCEMENT IS NOT THE
ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE WINNER OF
THE ELECTION.
THERE IS THE POSSIBILITY OF
CHANGING THE RESULTS AFTER
AUDITING THE VOTES AND REVIEWING
THE COMPLAINTS AND OBJECTIONS.
>> Brown: INDEED, THE COMMISSION
ACKNOWLEDGED THERE HAD BEEN
FRAUD, AND ANNOUNCED IT WILL
AUDIT BALLOTS FROM NEARLY 7,000
OF 23,000 POLLING STATIONS.
GHANI'S FOLLOWERS CELEBRATED,
BUT ABDULLAH HAS REFUSED TO
ACCEPT ANY RESULTS UNTIL A FULL
INVESTIGATION IS COMPLETED.
HE SPOKE YESTERDAY IN KABUL.
>> ( translated ): WE WILL NOT
ACCEPT THOSE RESULTS UNTIL CLEAN
VOTES ARE SEPARATED FROM UNCLEAN
VOTES.
NOBODY DOUBTS THAT THERE WAS
FRAUD IN AFGHANISTAN'S
ELECTIONS.
THERE WAS A MASS AND ORGANIZED
FRAUD.
A FRAUD THAT THE INDEPENDENT
ELECTION COMMISSION WAS INVOLVED
IN.
>> Brown: ABDULLAH ALSO ACCUSES
CURRENT PRESIDENT HAMID KARZAI,
WHO IS TERM-LIMITED, OF TRYING
TO RIG THE OUTCOME IN GHANI'S
FAVOR.
THE CLAIMS ARE REMINISCENT OF
WIDESPREAD FRAUD IN THE 2009
ELECTION, WHEN KARZAI DEFEATED
ABDULLAH.
IN WASHINGTON TODAY, STATE
DEPARTMENT SPOKESWOMAN JEN PSAKI
AGREED IT'S VITAL TO INVESTIGATE
THE CURRENT RESULTS.
>> RIGHT NOW, OUR FOCUS IS ON
ENCOURAGING A FULL AND THOROUGH
REVIEW OF ALL THE REASONABLE
ALLEGATIONS OF IRREGULARITIES.
WE THINK THAT'S ESSENTIAL TO
ENSURING THAT THE AFGHAN PEOPLE
HAVE CONFIDENCE IN THE INTEGRITY
OF THE ELECTORAL PROCESS.
>> Brown: RESOLVING THE ELECTION
DISPUTE IS ALSO ESSENTIAL TO
GETTING A BILATERAL AGREEMENT
THAT KEEPS A SMALL AMERICAN
FORCE IN AFGHANISTAN BEYOND
2014.
ABOUT 33,000 U.S. TROOPS ARE
STILL THERE.
MOST WILL LEAVE AT THE END OF
THIS YEAR, BUT SOME 9,800 WOULD
STAY ON TO TRAIN AFGHANS, IF
THERE'S AN AGREEMENT GOVERNING
THEIR PRESENCE.
KARZAI HAS REFUSED TO SIGN THE
PACT, BUT BOTH GHANI AND
ABDULLAH HAVE SAID THEY WOULD
SIGN IT.
THE FINAL ELECTION RESULTS ARE
DUE, JULY 22ND.
>> Woodruff: WHAT'S AT STAKE
BETWEEN NOW AND THEN?
FOR THAT WE'RE JOINED BY: ANDREW
WILDER, VICE PRESIDENT OF SOUTH
AND CENTRAL ASIA PROGRAMS AT THE
"UNITED STATES INSTITUTE OF
PEACE."
HE JUST RETURNED FROM
AFGHANISTAN LAST WEEK.
AND NAZIF SHAHRANI IS AN AFGHAN-
AMERICAN WHO'S A PROFESSOR OF
ANTHROPOLOGY AT INDIANA
UNIVERSITY.
NAZIF SHAHRANI, LET ME START
WITH YOU.
HOW SERIOUS A SITUATION IS THIS?
IS THERE POTENTIAL FOR A
DRAWN-OUT MAJOR PROBLEM?
>> YES, UNFORTUNATELY, THERE IS.
THE PEOPLE OF AFGHANISTAN HAVE
BEEN WAITING FOR THE RESULTS OF
THE ELECTION FOR SOME TIME.
GIVEN THE ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH
THE TWO CANDIDATES, ESPECIALLY
ABDULLAH ABDULLAH, IS AT THIS
POINT THAT IS THREATENING NOT TO
ACCEPT THE RESULTS AND ALSO SOME
OF HIS SUPPORTERS IN THE
PROVINCES AS WELL AS ONE OF HIS
VICE PRESIDENTS ARE SAYING THAT
IF R DEMANDS ARE NOT MET,
THEY MAY CREATE A PARALLEL
GOVERNMENT WHICH OBVIOUSLY WOULD
NOT BE TO THE ADVANTAGE OF THE
COUNTRY AND THE PEOPLE ARE
SERIOUSLY CONCERNED ABOUT IT.
>> Brown: ANDREW WILDER, YOU
WERE JUST THERE.
WHAT DID YOU SEE IN TERMS OF THE
ELECTION OR ANYTHING THAT HELPS
US UNDERSTAND THE VOTING, THE
POTENTIAL FOR FRAUD?
>> I WAS IN AFGHANISTAN FOR THE
FIRST ROUND OF THE ELECTION
WHICH WENT REMARKABLY WELL AND
THERE WERE PROBLEMS THEN, TOO,
BUT THE RESULTS WERE ACCEPTED AS
LEGITIMATE.
CLEARLY, THERE WERE PROBLEMS AND
SERIOUS PROBLEMS WHICH NOW NEED
TO BE INVESTIGATED AND THIS IS
WHERE I THINK IT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT FOR THE TWO CAMPAIGNS
TO -- YOU KNOW, TOGETHER WITH
THE ELECTORAL INSTITUTIONS TO
AGREE NOW ON T PROCESS MOVING
FORWARD ON HOW TO VERIFY THE
VARIOUS CHARGES OF FRAUD HAVE
BEEN MADE ACTUALLY BY BOTH CAMPS
SO THAT WE CAN GET THIS PROCESS
MOVING FORWARD BECAUSE AS MUCH
AS FLAWED, ELECTORAL PROCESS IS
ALL WE HAVE TO DERMOT COME AND
ULTIMATELY ELECTIONS END UP WITH
A WINNER AND LOSER AND IT'S
URGENT WE GET THAT PROCESS
MOVING FORWARD.
>> Brown: NAZIF SHAHRANI
REMIND US OF THE STAKES.
WHAT DOES IT MATTER BETWEEN THE
TWO CANDIDATES AND WHAT IS
RESTINGN TH OME OF A
OUTCOME HERE?
>> WELL, WHAT IS, I THINK, I
HOPE FOR IS A PEACEFUL
TRANSITION OF POWER FOR THE
FIRST TIME IN THE HISTORY OF
AFGHANISTAN, FROM ONE ELECTED
PRESIDENT, AGAIN, FRAUDULENT AS
IT WAS IN 2009, TO ANOTHER
PRESIDENT WHO WOULD HAVE THE
CONFIDENCE OF THE NATION.
UNFORTUNATELY, THE DISPUTE RIGHT
NOW, PARTICULARLY IN ACCOUNTING
AS PERHAPS THE ACQUISITION OF
STUFFING THE BALLOT BOXES BY
ABDULLAH ABDULLAH AGAINST
PRESIDENT KARZAI AND HIS
GOVERNMENT IS MAKING THE
POSSIBILITY OF OUTCOME RATHER
PROBLEMATIC AND VERY SERIOUS FOR
THE COUNTRY, AND ALSO FOR THE
REGION AND ULTIMATELY FOR THE
UNITED STATES AND THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY WORKED
SO HARD IN THE LAST 13 YEARS TO
STABILIZE THE COUNTRY AND THEY
ALL HOPED JUST AS THE PEOPLE OF
AFGHANISTAN HOPED THAT THERE
WILL BE A PEACEFUL TRANSITION
AND IT DOESN'T LOOK LIKE IT
MIGHT BE.
>> Brown: ANDREW WILDER, FOR
THE UNITED STATES THERE IS THE
AGREEMENT, THE WITHDRAWAL.
HOW DOES THIS POTENTIALLY IMPACT
THAT?
>> I THINK IF IT GETS TOO DRAWN
OUT, IT COULD FURTHER DELAY THE
SIGNING OF THE BILATERAL
SECURITY AGREEMENT AND,
CURRENTLY, THE SCHEDULED
INAUGURATION DATE, LET'S NOT
FORGET, THE AUGUST 2, SO THERE'S
NOT A WHOLE LOT OF TIME TO
RESOLVE THIS BEFORE PRESIDENT
KARZAI SAYS HE'S STEPPING DOWN
AND EVEN SAYING IF THER THERE'SO
ONE ELSE, I'LL TURN OVER POWER
TO MY VICE PRESIDENT AT THAT
POINT.
WE HAVE A SECURITY CRISIS
ALREADY IN AFGHANISTAN, WE HAVE
AN ECONOMIC CRY SAYS BREWING,
AND IT'S IMPERATIVE THIS
POLITICAL CRISIS GET RESOLVED
SWIFTLY SO WE CAN FOCUS ON THE
OTHER SERIOUS ISSUES IN
AFGHANISTAN.
THERE'S ANOTHER MAJOR
INTERPRETATIONAL AGENDA COMING
UP IN THAT THE PRESIDENT IS TO
GO TO CHINA IN AUGUST FOR AN
IMPORTANT REGIONAL CONFERENCE
AND NATO IN SEPTEMBER AND THE
U.N. GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
IT'S VERY IMPORTANT FOR
AFGHANISTAN TO HAVE A LEGITIMATE
SUCCESSOR TO KARZAI, BEING ABLE
TO REPRESENT THE CUNTRY IN
THESE INTERNATIONAL FORUM, AND
REGAIN WHAT PRESIDENT KARZAI
SQUANDERED.
>> Brown: WHAT IS PRESIDENT
KARZAI'S ROLE NOW?
IS HE PLAYING A ROLE IN THIS
ELECTION AND THE OUTCOME, GOOD
OR BAD?
>> WELL, ACCORDING TO HIS OWN
BROTHER, MAHMOUD KARZAI, HE HAS
BEEN A SPOILER.
HE HAS BEEN TRYING TO, ACCORDING
TO MAHMOUD, STAY IN POWER IN
THAT HE HAS CREATED THIS CRISIS
AND MANUFACTURED IT IN A WAY
THAT WOULD PERHAPS MAKE IT
POSSIBLE FOR HIM TO CONTINUE TO
STAY IN POWER, ESPECIALLY IF
THESE TWO CANDIDATES CANNOT
REACH AN AGREEMENT AND RESOLVE
THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS RIGHT
NOW.
SO THERE IS A THREAT, STILL,
THAT KARZAI MAY BE MANUFACTURING
THIS PARTICULAR CRISIS AND MAY
TRY TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THAT IN
THE LONG RUN.
ONE HOPES THAT THAT WOULD NOT BE
THE CASE, BUT, IF IT IS, IT,
OBVIOUSLY, -- HE'S WILLING TO BE
RESPONSIBLE FOR DRAGGINHE
COUNTRY BACK INTO A SERIOUS
CRISIS.
>> Brown: ANDREW, DO YOU SEE
KARZAI PLAYING A ROLE LIKE THAT,
POTENTIALLY, A NEGATIVE ROLE?
>> I THINK HE'S PLAYED A
NEGATIVE ROLE IN THE PAST.
I RARELY DISAGREE WITH THE
CTOR, BUT I THINK PRESIDENT
KARZAI LOST CONTROL OF THE
PROCESS.
I THINK THE PALACE IS
POLITICALLY VERY FRAGMENTED.
I THINK THE ELECTORAL
INSTITUTIONS ARE FRAGMENTED.
THE AFGHAN NATIONAL SECURITY
FORCE IN SOME WAYS ARE
FRAGMENTED.
SO THE IDEA PRESIDENT KARZAI
COULD MASTERMIND THIS ENTIRE
RIGGING IN ONE DIRECTION OR
ANOTHER, I ACTUALLY DON'T THINK
HE'S POWERFUL ENOUGH ANYMORE TO
DO THAT BECAUSE MANY OF THE
POLITICAL ELITES ARE LOOKING
BEYOND KARZAI FOR PATRONAGE, NOT
LOOKING TO HIM AND LISTENING TO
HIM ANYMORE.
>> Brown: ON THAT POINT,
HAVING JUST COME FROM THERE,
WHAT WAS THE SENSE OF THE
ATMOSPHERE AMONG PEOPLE THAT YOU
TALKED TO?
ARE THEY EAGER TO GET THIS
BEHIND THEMND AOVE M ON?
>> I THINK THE PEOPLE ARE
GETTING FRUSTRATED AND WANT A
RESULT AND AN OUTCOME, YOU KNOW,
BECAUSE THEY REALIZE AFGHAN'S
FUTURE DEPENDS ON THIS AND
THAT'S WHY WE SAW SO MANY VOTERS
TURN OUT TO VOTE IN THE FIRST
AND SECOND ROUND.
>> MORE THAN PEOPLE EXPECTED.
YES, AND CERTAINLY SOME OF
THAT WE CAN ATTRIBUTE TO FRAUD.
BUT I SAW IT WITH MY EYES THE
LONG LINES OF PEOPLE TURNING OUT
TO VOTE WAS HIGHER THAN
ANTICIPATE AND I THINK THAT WAS
BECAUSE THEY WERE VOTING FOR A
PEACEFUL FUTURE, WANTING, YOU
KNOW -- AND I THINK THAT'S WHY
THE URGENCY, I WANTED TO EMFA
ZEISS SIZE, OF GETTING THIS
PROCESS RESOLVED SO WE CAN GET A
LEIT MAT SUCCESSOR TO KARZAI IN
THE PALACE.
>> Brown: THANK YOU BOTH VERY
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, HOW FUNDS
FROM THE FEDERAL G.I. BILL ARE
FLOWING TO FOR-PROFIT SCHOOLS,
EVEN THOUGH ALL TOO FREQUENTLY,
VETERANS' PROSPECTS ARE NOT
APPRECIABLY BETTER AFTER
ATTENDING THEM.
THE FOR-PROFIT COLLEGE SECTOR IS
UNDER THE MICROSCOPE: THE
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION IS
EXPECTED TO CUT FEDERAL AID TO
SCHOOLS WITH HIGH DEFAULT RATES.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND STATE
ATTORNEYS GENERAL ALSO ARE
INVESTIGATING MARKETING AND
LENDING PRACTICES OF SOME
SCHOOLS.
MORE THAN $10 BILLION WERE SPENT
ON THE G.I. BILL FOR VETERANS'
EDUCATION LAST YEAR.
UNTIL NOW, FOR PROFITS HAVE
NETTED A GROWING AMOUNT OF MONEY
FROM A NEW GENERATION OF VETS.
IN CALIFORNIA, NEARLY TWO OF
EVERY THREE G.I. BILL DOLLARS IS
SPENT ON FOR-PROFIT SCHOOLS.
AARON GLANTZ HAS THE STORY FROM
OUR PARTNERS AT THE CENTER FOR
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING.
>> Reporter: THE WORLD WAR II
G.I. BILL.IT'S ONE OF THE MOST D
PROGRAMS IN AMERICAN HISTORY.
IT PAID THE FULL COST OF AN
EDUCATION AT ANY FOUR-YEAR
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY.
>> YOU MEAN HE CAN GET ANY KIND
OF EDUCATION HE WANTS?
NOW YOU'RE GETTING THE IDEA.
>> Reporter: THE GI BILL WAS
WEAKENED IN THE DECADES AFTER
WORLD WAR II, UNTIL CONGRESS
PASSED A NEW LAW IN 2008 TO HELP
VETERANS RETURNING HOME FROM
IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN.
AND SO, FOR THE FIRST TIME SINCE
WORLD WAR II, VETERANS CAN
RECEIVE THE FULL COST OF A
COLLEGE EDUCATION.
PAID FOR BY TAXPAYERS, UP TO
$19,000 A YEAR.
BUT G.I. BILL MONEY IS NOT GOING
WHERE CONGRESS EXPECTED.
FOR-PROFIT SCHOOLS LIKE THE
ASHFORD UNIVERSITY AND THE
UNIVERSITY OF PHOENIX ARE AMONG
THE LARGEST RECIPIENTS.
>> THESE SCHOOLS ARE SET UP TO
MAKE MONEY.
KATE O'GORMAN IS POLITICAL
DIRECTOR AT IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN
VETERANS OF AMERICA.
>> MANY VETERANS SIMPLY ARE
BEING AGGRESSIVELY AND
DECEPTIVELY RECRUITED BY SOME
BAD ACTORS IN THE FOR-PROFIT
SCHOOL SECTOR.
>> Reporter: SHE SAYS THOUSANDS
OF VETERANS ARE BEING LEFT WITH
WORTHLESS DEGREES AND FEW JOB
PROSPECTS.
>> WE'RE NOT GETTING THE
INVESTMENT THAT WE WANTED WHEN
WE SENT THESE MEN AND WOMEN TO
SCHOOL.
>> Reporter: IN CALIFORNIA
ALONE, THE CENTER FOR
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING FOUND
NEARLY 300 SCHOOLS BANNED FROM
RECEIVING STATE FINANCIAL AID,
THAT STILL GOT G.I. BILL MONEY.
EVEN SCHOOLS WITH NO ACADEMIC
ACCREDITATION AT ALL.
BEAUTY SCHOOLS, AUTO REPAIR
PROGRAMS, AND DOG TRAINING
ACADEMIES.
TOGETHER, MORE THAN $600
MILLION.
THE BIGGEST BENEFICIARY IS THE
FOR-PROFIT UNIVERSITY OF
PHOENIX, WHICH FAILS TO GRADUATE
MOST OF IT'S STUDENTS, ACCORDING
TO THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
EDUCATION.
NATIONALLY, IT TOOK IN NEARLY A
BILLION DOLLARS FROM THE G.I.
BILL OVER THE LAST FIVE YEARS.
THE UNIVERSITY OF PHOENIX HAS
BEEN ESPECIALLY SUCCESSFUL AT
ATTRACTING VETERANS IN SAN
DIEGO, A PORT CITY WITH A HIGH
CONCENTRATION OF VETERANS.
EVERY YEAR, SOLDIERS AND SAILORS
HERE RETIRE FROM ACTIVE DUTY AND
TURN TO THE G.I. BILL AS THEY
TRANSITION TO CIVILIAN LIFE.
AMONG THEM, DAVID PACE, WHO
SERVED 20 YEARS IN THE NAVY.
PACE DREAMED OF A CAREER IN THE
BUSINESS WORLD AND ENROLLED IN A
BACHELOR'S PROGRAM AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF PHOENIX.
>> I FIGURED THAT WITH THAT
COLLEGE DEGREE I WOULD GET A
BETTER JOB AND MOVE ON.
>> Reporter: HE TOLD ME A
RECRUITER FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF
PHOENIX SAID HE COULD TURN HIS
MILITARY EXPERIENCE INTO
ACADEMIC CREDIT AND GRADUATE IN
JUST 18 MONTHS, LEAVING HIM WITH
ENOUGH G.I. BILL MONEY TO PURSUE
A MASTER'S DEGREE.
>> BUT THAT AIN'T HOW IT WORKED.
>> Reporter: A YEAR INTO THAT
DEGREE PLAN, PACE SAYS HE WAS
TOLD HE WOULD NEED TO TAKE TEN
ADDITIONAL CLASSES TO GRADUATE,
PACE FEELS HE WAS TRICKED.
>> I DIDN'T KNOW.
I REALLY DIDN'T KNOW THAT.
I WAS GOING BY WHAT THEY TOLD
ME.
>> Reporter: IT TOOK PACE THREE
YEARS TO GRADUATE.
BY THEN HE HAD EXHAUSTED HIS
ENTIRE EDUCATION BENEFIT.
PACE ATTENDED THIS UNIVERSITY OF
PHOENIX CAMPUS IN SAN DIEGO.
IT HAS RECEIVED MORE G.I. BILL
MONEY THAN ANY BRICK AND MORTAR
CAMPUS IN AMERICA, $95 MILLION
OVER THE LAST FIVE YEARS.
THAT'S ALMOST SEVEN TIMES WHAT
THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SAN
DIEGO GOT.
IN FACT, THE CENTER FOR
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING FOUND,
THE UNIVERSITY OF PHOENIX SAN
DIEGO CAMPUS RECEIVED MORE G.I.
BILL MONEY THAN THE ENTIRE 10-
CAMPUS U.C. SYSTEM.
LAST JUNE, THE SCHOOL'S
ACCREDITING BODY, THE HIGERH
LEARNING COMMISSION, PUT THE
UNIVERSITY OF PHOENIX ON NOTICE,
SAYING THE SCHOOL DID NOT
"SUPPORT STUDENT LEARNING AND
EFFECTIVE TEACHING."
STUDENTS AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
PHOENIX OFTEN HAVE TROUBLE
REPAYING THEIR LOANS.
MORE THAN A QUARTER DEFAULT
WITHIN THREE YEARS OF LEAVING
SCHOOL.
AND, AT THIS CAMPUS, FEWER THAN
15% OF STUDENTS GRADUATE,
ACCORDING TO THE DEPARTMENT OF
EDUCATION.
I MET WITH RETIRED U.S. ARMY
COLONEL GARLAND WILLIAMS.
HE OVERSEES MILITARY PROGRAMS
FOR ALL UNIVERSITY OF PHOENIX
CAMPUSES NATIONWIDE.
DO YOU FEEL LIKE THIS ALMOST
BILLION DOLLARS OF TAXPAYER
MONEY TO THE UNIVERSITY OF
PHOENIX IS A GOOD INVESTMENT FOR
THE TAXPAYERS?
>> THE VETERANS HAVE CHOSEN US
B OF THE PROGRAMS THAT WE
OFFER.
WE HAVE OVER ONE HUNDRED
PROGRAMS THAT WE OFFER AND THEY
HAVE FOUND THE HIGHER EDUCATION
GOAL THAT THEY'VE SOUGHT.
THOSE PROGRAMS LEAD TO CAREERS
THAT THEY WANT TO ASPIRE TO.
THEY HAVE CHOSEN US.
>> Reporter: DO YOU HAVE ANY
EVIDENCE THAT IT'S ACTUALLY
LEADING TO CAREERS FOR THESE
VETERANS?
>> THE VETERANS HAVE CHOSEN US.
THEY HAVE CHOSEN TO USE THEIR
ENTITLEMENT AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
PHOENIX.
>> Reporter: GETTING AN
ASSOCIATES DEGREE AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF PHOENIX COSTS
NEARLY 10 TIMES WHAT A COMMUNITY
COLLEGE WOULD CHARGE.
NEVERTHELESS, THE UNIVERSITY OF
PHOENIX SAYS IT'S WORKING WITH
THE GOVERNMENT TO ENSURE THAT
VETERANS' NEEDS ARE MET.
TO PROVE IT'S POINT, THE COMPANY
ALLOWED US TO OBSERVE AS A TEAM
OF AUDITORS ARRIVED FROM THE
CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS.
UNIVERSITY OF PHOENIX STAFF
GATHERED VETERANS' TRANSCRIPTS
AND FINANCIAL INFORMATION AS
THEY PREPARED FOR INSPECTION.
THE AUDITORS WILL CHECK THESE
DOCUMENTS TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE
WITH G.I. BILL REQUIREMENTS.
THEIR GOAL: TO MAKE SURE THE
SCHOOL ISN'T BILLING THE
GOVERNMENT FOR STUDENTS WHO
DON'T EXIST.
>> Reporter: BUT THE INSPECTORS
DON'T LOOK AT ANYTHING ELSE.
LATANAYA JOHNSON IS A MEMBER OF
THE AUDIT TEAM.
ARE YOU LOOKING AT WHETHER OR
NOT THE INSTRUCTION IS GOOD?
>> NO, THAT'S NOT A PART OF THE
VISIT, AT ALL.
>> Reporter: THE UNIVERSITY OF
PHOENIX HAS BEEN PUT ON NOTICE
BY IT'S ACCREDITING AGENCY.
DO YOU LOOK AT THAT?
>> NO, THAT'S NOT A PART OF THE
VISIT AT ALL.
>> Reporter: OR ANY ISSUES THEY
MIGHT BE HAVING WITH THE FACULTY
NOT COMPLYING WITH CERTAIN
REGULATIONS?
YOU LOOK AT THAT?
>> NO, THAT'S A DIFFERENT
PROCESSING COMPLETELY.
>> Reporter: TURNS OUT NO ONE
>> Reporter: IN WASHINGTON,
LAWMAKERS HAVE TRIED AGAIN AND
AGAIN TO STRENGTHEN REGULATIONS
ON WHICH SCHOOLS CAN RECEIVE
G.I. BILL MONEY.
DEMOCRAT TOM HARKIN, THE CHAIR
OF THE SENATE COMME
OVERSEES EDUCATION, HAS SPENT
YEARS INVESTIGATING THE FOR-
PROFIT EDUCATION INDUSTRY.
>> NEITHER THE DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS NOR THE
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE HAS ANY
WAY OF ASSESSING WHETHER THEY
ARE GETTING A GOOD EDUCATION.
I MIGHT ADD NEITHER DOES THE
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION OR ANY
OF THE ENTITIES THAT ACCREDIT
THESE SCHOOLS.
THEY HAVE NO WAY OF ASSESSING
WHAT'S HAPPENG IN THETOSE
STUDENTS.
>> Reporter: KATE O'GORMAN OF
IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN VETERANS OF
AMERICA SAYS HER ORGANIZATION
HAS ALSO BEEN TRYING TO CHANGE
THINGS, BUT HAS RUN UP AGAINST
ORGANIZED OPPOSITION.
>> WE'VE SEEN MONEY GOING INTO
COMMITTEES AND CAMPAIGN
CONTRIBUTIONS.
WE SEE FOR-PROFIT SCHOOL
LOBBYISTS CONSISTENTLY ON THE
HILL.
ALMOST EVERY TIME THE VETERAN'S
COMMUNITY GOES INTO AN OFFICE
AND SAYS, "WE NEED THESE STRONG
REFORMS AND REGULATIONS."
WE SEE A FOR-PROFIT SCHOOL
LOBBYIST WALKING OUT.
>> Reporter: NOW, THE
LEGISLATIVE FIGHT IS MOVING TO
THE STATE LEVEL.
IN CALIFORNIA, A BILL WOULD HAVE
REQUIRED ALL SCHOOLS TO TELL
REGULATORS HOW MANY VETERANS
GRADUATE AND HOW MANY FIND JOBS.
IT WAS GUTTED IN THE FACE OF
OPPOSITION FROM FOR-PROFIT
COLLEGES.
IN A LETTER TO LAWMAKERS, THE
UNIVERSITY OF PHOENIX'S LOBBYIST
CALLED THOSE REQUIREMENTS
"CUMBERSOME" AND "OF LITTLE
PRACTICAL VALUE."
I ASKED GARLAND WILLIAMS TO
EXP>> WHAT I CAN TELL YOU AND YR
VIEWERS IS THAT THE SUPPORT THAT
WE PROVIDE OUR VETERANS, OUR
ACTIVE DUTY, AND THEIR FAMILY
MEMBERS IS PERSONAL.
>> Reporter: BUT WE DON'T
DESERVE TO KNOW HOW MANY OF THEM
ARE ACTUALLY SUCCEEDING?
>> YOU DESERVE TO KNOW THAT WE
PROVIDE THE UTMOST CARE TO OUR
MILITARY.
WE THINK WE DO IT RIGHT.
WE WERE ALWAYS A LEARNING
ORGANIZATION TO GET IT RIGHT,
BUT WE THINK WE DO IT RIGHT
BECAUSE VETERANS CHOOSE THE
UNIVERSITY OF PHOENIX.
>> Reporter: VETERAN DAVID PACE
WISHES HE HAD NEVER MADE THAT
CHOICE.
AFTER SPENDING AN ESTIMATED
$50,000 IN TAXPAYERS' MONEY TO
OBTAIN A BUSINESS DEGREE, HE IS
STILL DOING THE SAME KIND OF
BLUE COLLAR, PHYSICAL LABOR THAT
HE DID IN THE SERVICE.
>> I THINK THAT'S THE MOST
FRUSTRATING PART ABOUT IT IS
THAT I COULD HAVE COME RIGHT OUT
OF THE NAVY AND GOT THIS JOB
WITHOUT THE TIME AND THE
HEADACHE.
>> Reporter: HE'S A MAINTENANCE
ELECTRICIAN FOR A DEFENSE
CONTRACTOR AT NAVAL BASE SAN
DIEGO.
PACE SAYS EMPLOYERS DON'T TAKE
HIS DEGREE SERIOUSLY.
>> IF YOU SAY YOU GOT A DEGREE
FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF PHOENIX,
YOMM
THAT'S A PAPER FACTORY, THAT'S A
CERTIFICATE FACTORY, YOU DON'T
GET THE SAME RESPECT.
>> Reporter: HE HOPES OTHER
VETERANS THINK MORE CAREFULLY
THAN HE DID ABOUT WHERE THEY
SPEND THEIR EDUCATION BENEFIT.
BUT ADVOCATES SAY IT'S NOT
REALISTIC TO EXPECT VETERANS
LIKE PACE TO POLICE THE G.I.
BILL.
THEY SAY THAT'S THE JOB OF
CONGRESS AND REGULATORS.
FIVE YEARS AFTER THE NEW G.I.
BILL BECAME LAW, THERE ARE STILL
VIRTUALLY NO RESTRICTIONS ON
WHERE THAT MONEY CAN BE SPENT.
>> Woodruff: A COUPLE OF
FOOTNOTES: FOR THE RECORD, DAVID
PACE DOES WORK FOR B.A.E.
SYSTEMS, WHICH IS AN UNDERWRITER
OF THE NEWSHOUR.
THIS PAST WEEK, ONE MAJOR FOR-
PROFIT PLAYER, CORINTHIAN
COLLEGES, UNDER SCRUTINY FROM
THE GOVERNMENT AND FACING
BANKRUPTCY, ANNOUNCED IT WOULD
SELL OR CLOSE IT'S 97 U.S.
SCHOOLS.
THIS STORY WAS PART OF "REVEAL,"
A NEW INVESTIGATIVE RADIO
PROGRAM FROM THE CENTER FOR
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING AND
P.R.X.
IT'S AIRING ON PUBLIC RADIO
STATIONS NATIONALLY ALL THIS
WEEK.
>> Woodruff: A FLOOD OF
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANT CHILDREN
INTO THE U.S., OFTEN RISKING
THEIR LIVES TO ESCAPE VIOLENCE
IN CENTRAL AMERICA, HAS SPARKED
PROTESTS AND DEBATE AROUND THE
COUNTRY ON HOW TO HANDLE THEIR
ARRIVAL.
>> Woodruff: IT WAS A SCENE THAT
LAUNCHED THE SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA
TOWN OF MURIETTA INTO THE
NATIONAL SPOTLIGHT.
LAST TUESDAY, DOZENS OF
PROTESTERS TURNED BACK THREE
HOMELAND SECURITY BUSES HEADED
FOR THE TOWN'S BORDER PATROL
STATION.
INSIDE THE VEHICLES WERE 140
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS, MOSTLY
WOMEN AND YOUNG CHILDREN.
THEY'D BEEN FLOWN IN FROM TEXAS,
WHERE DETENTION FACILITIES HAVE
REACHED FULL CAPACITY.
>> THEY'RE COMING HERE FOR FREE
FOOD, FREE HOUSING, FREE
MEDICAL.
>> Woodruff: THE PROTESTS DREW
NEW ATTENTION TO A GROWING
PROBLEM ALONG THE NATION'S
SOUTHERN BORDER.
MORE THAN 52,000 UNACCOMPANIED
CHILDREN HAVE BEEN DETAINED
SINCE OCTOBER, ILLEGALLY TRYING
TO CROSS INTO THE UNITED STATES
FROM MEXICO.
MOST HAIL FROM THREE NATIONS:
GUATEMALA, HONDURAS AND EL
SALVADOR.
PLACES RIFE WITH POVERTY,
VIOLENCE AND SMUGGLERS OFFERING
TO DELIVER THE CHILDREN FOR A
PRICE.
ONCE IN THE U.S., THEY'VE BEEN
TAKEN TO BORDER PATROL
FACILITIES IN TEXAS, ARIZONA AND
ELSEWHERE, BUT THEIR GROWING
NUMBERS HAVE LED TO OVERFLOW
SITES, SUCH AS MURIETTA.
>> MURRIETA EXPECTS THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT TO ENFORCE OUR LAWS
INCLUDING THE DEPORTATION OF
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS CAUGHT
CROSSING OUR BORDERS.
NOT DISPERSE THEM INTO OUR LOCAL
COMMUNITIES.
>> Woodruff: THERE WERE MORE
PROTESTS FRIDAY, ON BOTH SIDES
OF THE IMMIGRATION DEBATE.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS CALLED THE
SURGE OF UNACCOMPANIED MINORS A
"HUMANITARIAN CRISIS" AND SAYS
MOST WILL NOT REMAIN IN THE U.S.
>> THE JOURNEY IS UNBELIEVABLY
DANGEROUS FOR THESE KI
THE CHILDREN WHO ARE FORTUNATE
ENOUGH TO SURVIVE IT WILL BE
KEN CARE OF WHILE THEY GO
THROUGH THE LEGAL PROCESS, BUT
IN MOST CASES THAT PROCESS WILL
LEAD TO THEM BEING SENT BACK
HOME.
>> Woodruff: BUT IT REMAINS
UNCLEAR JUST WHEN THE CHILDREN
BEING DETAINED WILL BE DEPORTED.
>> Reporter: TODAY, OUTSIDE THE
WHITE HOUSE, IMMIGRATION
ADVOCATES CRITICIZED THE
PRESIDENT FOR NOT DOING ENOUGH
TO HELP UNDOCUMENTED FAMILIES.
THE PRESIDENT IS NOW PREPARING
TO ASK CONGRESS FOR MORE THAN $2
BILLION TO HIRE MORE IMMIGRATION
JUDGES AND OPEN ADDITIONAL
DETENTION FACILITIES.
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE ON WHAT'S
CAUSING TODAY'S CIRCUMSTANCES,
AND POSSIBLE REMEDIES,  WE TURN
TO MARSHALL FITZ, DIRECTOR OF
IMMIGRATION POLICY WITH THE
CENTER FOR AMERICAN PROGRESS, A
LEFT-LEANING THINK TANK IN
WASHINGTON.
AND JENNIFER VAUGHAN, THE
DIRECTOR FOR POLICY STUDIES AT
THE RIGHT-LEANING CENTER FOR
IMMIGRATION STUDIES.
WE WELCOME YOU BOTH TO THE
PROGRAM.
MARSHAL FITZ, LET ME START WITH
YOU.
I WANT TO ASK YOU BOTH THIS
QUESTION.
WHAT'S YOUR UNDERSTANDING OF WHY
WE ARE SEEING THIS BIG INFLUX OF
CHILDREN ESPECIALLY FROM CENTRAL
AMERICA?
>> WELL, IT'S CLEAR THE MAJOR
DRIVERS BEHIND THIS RECENT
INFLUX ARE THE CONDITION IN
THEIR COUNTRIES.
WE KNOW THIS BECAUSE OF THE FACT
THEY ARE DISPERSING THROUGHOUT
THE REGION.
IT'S A REGIONAL CRISIS.
THERE'S A 712% INCREASE IN
APPLICATIONS IN PANAMA, NICK RA
WAX COSTA RICA, AND PEOPLE ARE
LEAVING BECAUSE OF ENDEMIC
VIOLENCE, THE WEAK INSTITUTIONAL
GOVERNMENT AND LACK OF
PROTECTIONS FOR THE CIVIL
SOCIETY THERE AND IT'S HAPPENING
NOW BECAUSE THAT VIOLENCE IS
ESCALATING.
HONDURAS IS THE MURDER CAPITAL
OF THE WORLD.
>> Woodruff: IN FACT WE HAVE A
GRAPHIC TO SHOW OUR AUDIENCE,
THEY HAVE THE HIGHEST NUMBER OF
DEATHS PER 100,000 PEOPLE.
FOLLOWING IS EL SALVADOR -- THE
FOURTH IS EL SALVADOR AND THE
FIRTH IS GUATEMALA.
>> YES.
>> Woodruff: AND THESE ARE THE
COUNTRIES SENDING SO MANY OF THE
CHILDREN.
JESSICA VAUGHN, WHAT IS YOUR
SENSE OF YOUR UNDERSTANDING OF
WHAT IS SENDING MOST OF THESE
CHILDREN?
>> WELL, THERE EARL IS POVERTY
AND VIOLENCE IN THE THREE
COUNTRIES THAT ARE SENDING MOST
OF THE PEOPLE ACROSS THE BORDER
IN SOUTH TEXAS, NOW, BUT MANY OF
THEM WHO ARE COMING ARE NOT
ACTUALLY COMING FROM THE VIOLENT
AREAS OF THE COUNTRIES.
THEY'RE COMING FROM ALL OVER
RURAL AREAS, AREAS DISTANT FROM
THE VIOLENCE.
WHAT WE KNOW FROM BORDER PATROL
INTELLIGENCE, IMMIGRATION, FROM
THE MIGRANT REPORTERS AND THEIR
OWN GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS IS THE
MAIN REASON THEY'RE COMING IS
BECAUSE THEY KNOW THAT THEY WILL
BE ALLOWED TO STAY, FOR THE MOST
MART, AND THAT'S WHAT'S DRIVING
THIS AT THIS TIME.
THEY HAVE BEEN TOLD BY FRIENDS
AND FAMILY WHO HAVE ALREADY COME
HERE ILLEGALLY WHAT THEY CAN SAY
AND THAT IF THEY COME WITH KIDS
OR IF THEY SEND THEIR KIDS, THAT
THE CHANCES ARE ALMOST CERTAIN
THAT THEY'LL BE ALLOWED TO STAY
HERE.
>> Woodruff: AND MARSHAL FITZ,
THERE HAS BEEN REPORTING TO THIS
EFFECT THAT THE WORD HAS SPREAD
AMONG MANY OF THE COMMUNITIES.
>> THE MOST THOROUGH STUDY WE
HAVE ON WHAT'S DRIVING THE KIDS
TO FLEE THEIR OWN COUNTRIES AND
LEAVE THEIR OWN FAMILIES IS FROM
THE AND THEY INTERVIEWED
MORE THAN 400 KIDS, U.N.
INTERNATIONAL AGENCY.
THEY SPENT A FEW HOURS WITH THE
KIDS AND ONLY A SMALL HANDFUL
MENTIONED IMMIGRATION STATUS IN
THE COUNTRY.
THEY ALL TALKED ABOUT THE
VIOLENCE THEY WERE FLEEING.
I'M SURE THERE ARE
MISPERCEPTIONS THAT ARE BEING
PUT OUT BY SMUGGLING OPERATIONS
AND WE ARE CRACKING DOWN ON
THOSE OPERATIONS, BUT THE REAL
REASON PEOPLE ARE LEAVING THE
COUNTRIES IS BECAUSE OF THE
VIOLENCE AND THE CONDITIONS
THEY'RE EXPERIENCING IN THEIR
HOME COUNTRY.
>> Woodruff: JESSICA VAUGHN,
YOU WERE SAYING MANY IS COMING
FROM AREAS WHERE THE VIOLENCE IS
NOT AN ISSUE.
IS THAT WHAT I UNDERSTOOD YOU TO
SAY?
>> THAT'S ACCORDING TO
INFORMATION THAT WAS RELEASED BY
THE BORDER PATROL, AND ALSO THE
BORDER PATROL INTERVIEWS ALL OF
THESE MIGRANTS AT THE TIME THAT
THEY SURRENDER TO THE BORDER
PATROL, AND WHAT THEY'RE TELLING
THE BORDER PATROL, 95% OF THEM
HAVE SAID THAT THEY'RE CO
BECAUSE THEY HEARD THAT THEY
WOULD BE ALLOWED TO STAY.
IN FACT, THAT'S NOT A FALSE
RUMOR OR A MISPERCEPTION.
IT IS, IN FACT, WHAT'S BEEN
HAPPENING.
ONLY 3% OF THE CENTRAL AMERICANS
WHO HAVE COME INTO CONTACT WITH
THE BORDER PATROL IN RECENT
MONTHS HAVE ACTUALLY BEEN SENT
BACK.
SO THE VAST MAJORITY OF THEM ARE
ALLOWED TO STAY AND ARE ALLOWED
TO RESETTLE IN THE COUNTRY.
>> Woodruff: MARSHAL FITZ, WE
KNOW IT IS A DIFFERENT PROCESS
BECAUSE OF THE LAW FOR DEALING
WITH CHILDREN OR ANY IMMIGRANT
COMING FROM CENTRAL AMERICA, IS
THAT CORRECT, BECAUSE OF A LAW
PASSED SEVERAL YEARS AGO.
>> UNDER PRESIDENT GEORGE BUSH.
IT'S A LAW THAT WAS DESIGNED TO
ENSURE THAT UNACCOMPANIED KIDS
OR KIDS WHO ARE A MEMBER, WITHOT
A PARENT, THAT THEY ARE ELIGIBLE
TO GO THROUGH THE FULL SCREENING
PROCESS TO ENSURE THAT THEY ARE
OR ARE NOT ELIGIBLE FOR
PROTECTION.
WHAT JESSICA SAYS ABOUT THIS
ALED
FUNCTION OF THE FACT THAT OUR
IMMIGRATION COURTS ARE SO
BACKLOGGED.
THAT'S SOMETHING I THINK SHE AND
I CAN PROBABLY AGREE ON IS THERE
IS VERY MUCH A NEED TO INFUSE
RESOURCES INTO THE SYSTEM TO
ENSURE THAT CASES CAN GET
ADJUDICATED MORE EXPEDITIOUSLY.
THAT IS SOMETHING THAT IS A
LONG-STANDING PROBLEM.
CONGRESS HAS STARVED THE
IMMIGRATION COURTS OF RESOURCE
FORCE DECADES, NOW.
>> Woodruff: JESSICA VAUGHN,
HOW MUCH OF A PART OF THE
PROBLEM IS THAT?
AND THE FACT AS WE MENTIONED A
MINUTE AGO THAT THIS LAW WAS
PASSED UNDER PRESIDENT BUSH
SAYING UNACCOMPANIED MINORS
COMING IN THERE CENTRAL AMERICA
HAD TO GO THROUGH A HEARING
PROCESS BEFORE THEY COULD BE
DEPORTED?
>> WELL, THE LAW WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT HERE WAS PASSED AT THE
INITIATIVE OF CERTAIN DEMOCRATIC
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS WHO WANTED
TO CREATE A PROCESS FOR CHILDREN
WHO WERE BEING TRAFFICKED INTO
THE UNITED STATES.
CLEARLY, THAT'S NOT THE CASE
WITH MOST TO HAVE THE
INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE A -- MOST OF
THE INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE A PART
OF THE SURGE.
ABOUT TWO-THIRDS PEOPLE WHO
SURRENDERED TO THE BORDER PATROL
ARE ACTUALLY ENTIRE FAMILIES, SO
ARE NOT UNACCOMPANIED KIDS, AND
THE VAST MAJORITY OF KIDS WHO
TURNED THEMSELVES OVER TO THE
BORDER PATROL ARE COMING HERE TO
JOIN FAMILY MEMBERS WHO ARE
ALREADY HERE.
SO, ONCE THEY REJOIN THEIR
FAMILY MEMBERS, THEY ARE NO
LONGER UNACCOMPANIED, AND I
THINK THAT IT MAKES SENSE THAT
THEY SHOULD NOT NECESSARILY
BENEFIT FROM A PROCEDURE THAT
WAS SET UP TO HANDLE THE MOST
DIFFICULT CASES OF KIDS WHO WERE
ACTUALLY TRAFFICKED.
IT'S NOT TRAFFICKING WHEN
PARENTS PAY A SMUGGLER TO BRING
THEIR CHILDREN TO THE UNITED
STATES, AND THEN GET TO REJOIN
WITH THEIR CHILD WITH NO
QUESTIONS ASKED EITHER ABOUT THE
SMUGGLING OR THEIR OWN LEGAL
STATUS HERE.
HERE, THINGS
PRESIDENT CAN ADDRESS WITHOUT
CHANGING THE LAW.
>> Woodruff: MARSHAL FITZ,
WHAT ABOUT THAT?
>> JESSICA IS MAKING ASSERTIONS
THAT AREN'T GROUNDED IN THE
FACTS.
ALL OF THE REPORTING DONE SO FAR
BY INDEPENDENT AGENCIES, NOT BY
BORDER PATROL, SHOW SOMEWHERE
UPWARDS OF 58% OR 60% OF THE
KIDS ARE ENTITLED TO SOME FORT
OF PROTECTION -- FORM OF
PROTECTION AND WE'RE SEEING
THAT, THAT MANY OF THE KIDS ARE
GRANTED EITHER ASYLUM OR SPECIAL
IMMIGRANT JUVENILE PROTECTION.
SO THE FACTS ARE THESE KIDS ARE
ELIGIBLE FOR STATUS BECAUSE THEY
ARE EITHER FLEEING TRAUMATIC
SITUATIONS IN THEIR HOME
COUNTRIES OR THEY'RE BEING
TRAFFD WHICH
IS, AGAI ANN,OTHER VERY SERIOUS
PROBLEM.
THE UNACCOMPANIED MINORS, WE
SHOULDN'T BE TREATING THESE KIDS
LIKE THEY'RE FedEx PACKAGES
AND TRYING TO SEND THEM BACK
IMMEDIATELY.
WE HAVE TO TREAT THEM HUMANELY
AND I THINK THAT'S WHAT MOST OF
US IN THE ADVOCACY COMMUNITY ARE
LOOKING FOR.
>> Woodruff: THE WHITE HOUSE
WA SYINGSA MOST UNACCOMPANIED
CHILDREN ARRIVING ARE UNLIKELY
TO QUALIFY THEM FOR HUMANITARIAN
RELIEF THAT WOULD PREVENT FROM
SENDING THEM BACK HOME, THAT
CAME FROM THE ADMINISTRATION
TODAY.
THANK YOU JESSICA VAUGHN AND
MARSHAL FITZ.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
YOU.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
MILITANTS IN GAZA FIRED DOZENS
OF ROCKETS AS FAR AS 50 MILES
INTISRAEL THIS EVENING.
MEANWHILE, AN ISRAELI OFFICIAL
SAID THREE SUSPECTS CONFESSED TO
THE MURDER OF A PALESTINIAN
TEEN-AGER.
AFGHAN ELECTIONS OFFICIALS
ANNOUNCED FORMER FINANCE
MINISTER ASHRAF GHANI HAS A BIG
LEAD IN INITIAL RESULTS FROM A
PRESIDENTIAL RUN-OFF.
HIS RIVAL, ABDULLAH ABDULLAH,
CLAIMED EXTENSIVE FRAUD.
AND A FEDERAL JUDGE GAVE INITIAL
APPROVAL TO A CONCUSSION
SETTLEMENT BETWEEN THE NATIONAL
FOOTBALL LEAGUE AND THOUSANDS OF
FORMER PLAYERS.
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE, 200
YEARS AGO, A NEW GENRE OF
FICTION TOOK THE WORLD BY STORM,
THANKS IN LARGE PART TO SIR
WALTER SCOTT.
READ ABOUT THE SCOTTISH AUTHOR'S
WORK "WAVERLEY," PUBLISHED ON
THIS DAY IN 1814, WHICH SET THE
EXAMPLE FOR THE "HISTORICAL
NOVEL" FROM THAT POINT FORWARD.
THAT'S ON OUR ART BEAT PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON TUESDAY, DEFENSE SECRETARY
HAGEL GOES TO CAPITOL HILL
TO FACE QUESTIONS OVER IRAQ AND
AFGHANISTAN.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF, WE'LL SEE YOU
ON-LINE AND AGAIN HERE TOMORROW
EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.